Chapter 1 - Italy and digital services
======================================

Introduction
------------

The aim of this white paper is to analyse the impact of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) on our society and, specifically, how these
technologies can be used by Public Administration (PA) to improve
services for citizens and businesses. All of this is part of a broader
framework of the policies to be implemented by the public sector to
facilitate the digital transformation of the country that works as the
engine of social, economic and cultural development.

To accelerate this transformation process, it is possible to draw
inspiration from international experiences that have brought tangible
results: Italy must excel in the search for innovative strategies,
perhaps able to feed on the historical, cultural and social wealth of
the country and the Mediterranean, and, at the same time, succeed in
seizing the best that has emerged from the strategies of those countries
that were the first in making the evolution of public information
technology the lever for transition to a new global structure of the
economy and society.

It is therefore necessary to support the country’s innovation forces in
order to obtain increasingly competitive models and initiate a radical
change in the relationship between citizens, public administrations and
the market. The ultimate goal of this process is the creation of modern,
easy to use, accessible and high-quality public services, oriented to
the understanding of users’ needs, thus allowing the level of citizen
satisfaction and trust in the institutions to be increased.

This document intends to outline the development prospects of digital
public services and the challenges that the country will face to
implement and use the new technologies while respecting ethical values
and norms, putting the citizen at the centre of this evolutionary path.

The Italian situation
---------------------

Before describing the state of the art and the future prospects of
Artificial Intelligence in our society and in the Public Administration,
it may be useful to analyse what is happening in the field of digital
transformation in the public sector, in order to understand the current
situation and imagine how AI can create synergies with the digitization
process of the Country.

As highlighted by the *Digital Economy and Society Index - DESI
2017* [1]_, Italy is growing, but there is still a gap between the
supply of digital services and their actual use. Our country has
nevertheless made progress on connectivity, a basic condition to allow
the development of a digital ecosystem, thanks also to the Ultra
Broadband Plan [2]_.

According to the data of the Annual Report of the Italian Authority for
Communications Guarantees (AGCOM), at present, 90.7% of households in
which there is at least one minor have a fixed and mobile broadband
connection, a figure that reaches only 20.7% for households aged over
65. At the same time, 91.6% of households with at least one graduate
have a broadband connection, a figure that falls to 55.3% for families
in which the highest qualification is the middle school certificate.
This once again highlights the centrality of demand, and not just
supply, in stimulating the dissemination of internet-based technologies
in Italy.

Data on the Italian dynamism of start-ups and innovative small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) confirms the importance of the “demand
factor”.

In our country, according to a census updated to 2017 [3]_, innovative
startups and SMEs are over 8000, twice the number compared to 2015,
employing 46107 people, including shareholders and employees. The
digital market is growing and the ICT sector is undergoing a development
phase, thanks to the increase in investments: in 2016, it grew by 1.8%
to reach 66 billion euros in turnover [4]_. As it is growing the demand
for high level digital skills, in a context in which only 29% of the
workforce possesses them compared to an EU average of 37% [5]_.

As for digital public services, as the DESI again confirms, Italy is
positioned at the top of the ranking in terms of quantitative supply but
has low percentages of use by the population. Also Eurostat partly
confirms this fact: despite the majority of Italians expresses the need
for a more streamlined relationship with the Public Administration [6]_,
when this is made possible, the tools made available are used by only
13% of citizens compared to a European average of 30% [7]_.

The Italian digital strategy
----------------------------

In the context of the European Digital Agenda [8]_, Italy has developed
its national strategy by converting the EU objectives into initiatives
aimed at the digital transformation of the public administration [9]_.
In this way, the interventions in the public sector become the driving
force for business development and the growth of citizens’ skills. The
2014-2020 strategy of the Digital Agenda has therefore become a
veritable tool to pursue the great objectives of growth, employment,
quality of life and democratic participation.

But the challenges of digital transformation have changed quickly:
Internet of Things (IoT), big data analytics, Artificial Intelligence
and blockchain are the vectors through which the new digital economy
moves. To also address these issues, in 2017, the Three-Year Plan for
Information Technology in Public Administration was approved [10]_. The
Plan contains operating indications (actions, times and objectives) for
the development of four pillars: digital ecosystems or policy areas
(health, school, justice, etc.), intangible infrastructures (including
enabling platforms and PA data), physical infrastructures and
cybersecurity. The Plan was created to effectively guide the digital
transformation of the country, becoming a reference for central and
local administrations in the development of their information systems.
It sets the fundamental architectural principles, the rules of usability
and interoperability and rationalises ICT expenditure.

Tackling these challenges imposes, however, the identification of a new
technical, ethical and regulatory framework that could enable the public
sector to address and manage new scenarios, ameliorating the efficiency
and effectiveness of existing projects and providing tools and skills
for the future ones. At the same time, it is necessary to plan the ways
in which to stimulate and accompany the cultural evolution of the
country, involving the population, overcoming diversity, reticence and
conflict, and identifying new perspectives. The use of Artificial
Intelligence tools applied to services, the central subject of this
white paper, is only one of the sectors in which Italy is trying to
achieve the objectives of the Three-Year Plan for Information Technology
in Public Administration. For this specific purpose, the “Artificial
Intelligence Task Force at the service of the citizens” [11]_ was set up
to discuss the new opportunities offered by this type of technology in
our daily life and, more specifically, in the construction of a new
relationship between State and citizens.

**Insertion of Supplementary Data Sheets on Projects Linked to the
Three-Year Plan (Spid, PagoPa) - by AgID**
   
.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [1]
   The Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) is the index developed
   by the European Commission to assess the progress of EU Member States
   towards a digital economy and society through five indicators: (1)
   connectivity; (2) human capital; (3) internet use, (4) integration of
   digital technology; (5) digital public services. *See*
   `https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/desi <https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/desi>`__.

.. [2]
   The website of the Ultra-Broadband Strategic Plan of the Italian
   Government
   `bandaultralarga.italia.it <http://bandaultralarga.italia.it>`__.

.. [3]
   The website of the Ministry of Economic Development, innovative
   start-up report
   `www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/impresa/competitivita-e-nuove-imprese/start-up-innovative/relazione-annuale-e-rapporti-periodici <http://www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/impresa/competitivita-e-nuove-imprese/start-up-innovative/relazione-annuale-e-rapporti-periodici>`__.

.. [4]
   Assinform “Digital in Italy 2017” report
   `www.assinform.it/pubblicazioni/rapporto_assinform.kl <http://www.assinform.it/pubblicazioni/rapporto_assinform.kl>`__.

.. [5]
   *See* note 1.

.. [6]
   14\ :sup:`th` edition of the report Benchmark Measurement of European
   eGovernment Services (2017):

   `http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=48587 <http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=48587>`__.

.. [7]
   The Eurostat 2017 survey on Digital Economy and Society in Europe
   data, whose preparation is a basis for the calculation of the DESI
   (Digital Economy and Society Index)

   *See*
   `http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/digital-economy-and-society/data/main-tables <http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/digital-economy-and-society/data/main-tables>`__

.. [8]
   The European Digital Agenda, launched by the European Commission in
   May 2010, precisely defined the objectives for developing the digital
   economy and culture in Europe within the framework of the Europe 2020
   strategy. Starting from this, Italy has developed its own national
   strategy, identifying intervention priorities and methods, as well as
   actions to be carried out and measured based on specific indicators,
   in line with the evaluation framework of the European Digital Agenda
   itself.

   *See*
   `http://www.agid.gov.it/agenda-digitale/agenda-digitale-europea <http://www.agid.gov.it/agenda-digitale/agenda-digitale-europea>`__.

.. [9]
   The main objectives are: centralise planning and public spending on
   the subject; pursue modernisation of Public Administration starting
   from processes, overcoming the approach of technical rules and
   guidelines, and aiming rather at centrality of the user experience
   and needs; use an architecture based on an open and standard
   approach, which guarantees accessibility and maximum interoperability
   of data and services; seek solutions to stimulate cost reduction and
   improve service quality, contemplating remuneration mechanisms, also
   capable of stimulating suppliers to pursue increasingly innovative
   forms of delivery/use of the services themselves.

.. [10]
   The official website of the Three-Year Plan for Information
   Technology in Public Administration 2017-2019 - *See*
   `https://pianotriennale-ict.italia.it/ <https://pianotriennale-ict.italia.it/>`__.

.. [11]
   The official website of the AI Task Force
   `https://ia.italia.it <https://ia.italia.it/>`__.
